# Dissection of muscles in pectoral region

1. Clean the superficial surface of the **pectoralis major muscle** and use your fingers to define its borders (FIG. 2.8). Study an illustration and note that the deep fascia on the superficial and deep surfaces of the pectoralis major muscle is called **pectoral fascia** and that it is continuous with the **axillary fascia** that forms the base of the axilla. **[G 506; L 41; N 411; R 406; C 17]**
2. Identify the two heads of the pectoralis major muscle: **clavicular head** and **sternocostal head** (FIG. 2.8). Observe that the juncture of these two heads is at the sternoclavicular joint.
3. Use your fingers to trace the tendon of the pectoralis major muscle to its lateral attachment on the humerus. The pectoralis major muscle flexes, adducts, and medially rotates the humerus.
4. Identify the **deltopectoral triangle** (FIG. 2.8). It is located between the superior border of the clavicular head of the pectoralis major muscle and the inferior border of the deltoid muscle near the clavicle. Laterally, the deltopectoral triangle narrows to form the **deltopectoral groove**.
5. Using blunt dissection, follow the **cephalic vein** from the arm to the deltopectoral triangle where the vein passes deeply to enter the axilla. Preserve the cephalic vein in subsequent steps of this dissection.
6. To prepare the pectoralis major muscle for transection, relax the sternal head of the pectoralis major muscle by flexing and adducting the arm. Gently insert your fingers posterior to the inferior border of the pectoralis major muscle and create a space between the sternal head of the pectoralis major and the **clavipectoral fascia**. Push your fingers superiorly to open this space.
7. Beginning at the inferior border of the muscle, use scissors to detach the sternoscostal head of the pectoralis major muscle from its attachment to the sternum (FIG. 2.8, dashed line).
8. Still working from inferior to superior, insert your fingers under the clavicular head and palpate the **medial and lateral pectoral nerves and vessels**.
9. Now use scissors to cut the clavicular head of the pectoralis major muscle close to the clavicle (FIG. 2.8, dashed line). Preserve the cephalic vein. Note that the **lateral pectoral nerve** and the **pectoral branch of the thoracoacromial artery** enter the deep surface of the clavicular head.
10. Reflect the pectoralis major muscle laterally, leaving it attached to the humerus. Attempt to preserve the nerves and vessels that enter its deep surface.
11. Deep to the pectoralis major muscle are the **clavipectoral fascia**, **pectoralis minor muscle,** and **subclavius muscle** (FIG. 2.8). **[G 506; L 41; N 416; R 407]**
12. Identify the **pectoralis minor muscle**. Its inferior attachment is on ribs 3 to 5 near their costal cartilages. Its superior attachment is on the coracoid process of the scapula. The pectoralis minor muscle draws the glenoid cavity of the scapula anteriorly and inferiorly.
13. Note that the **medial pectoral nerve** pierces the pectoralis minor muscle and then enters the deep surface of the pectoralis major muscle, innervating both.
    
    **FIGURE 2.8.**
    
    ![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/m_tank-ch002-image008.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=jApwY867iURajemhUDxRvUNjFYddfOw9u6eUHx4kiT4Vp0Oh1kGJ-MFE31jf~9nYEJP-7nw3CkINhXmoIVEUmuqWd8diUKv21gT2rVlRb1TWTtrTsCy2PEnnEzBhRdsu6hqAByC4zOutNwMMvnN9KZmnOUKfczj87LVufeppNOFFDbTh1oZYbsk-SCdsXwi6c9t-aDkLWCEWwFGgLW0y2vFG2LDXzcgRWitV3i98e0gcCGkWT7F~K5PmSi60TlBfgkk~T8oLf0LIjQ~ycF850dZNsGsVdMfmr4tmICYU64BzORAhXYf0gZQLG-zUjLDDdHImHcLP5NPKwHYadZHWXg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/m_tank-ch002-image008.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=jApwY867iURajemhUDxRvUNjFYddfOw9u6eUHx4kiT4Vp0Oh1kGJ-MFE31jf~9nYEJP-7nw3CkINhXmoIVEUmuqWd8diUKv21gT2rVlRb1TWTtrTsCy2PEnnEzBhRdsu6hqAByC4zOutNwMMvnN9KZmnOUKfczj87LVufeppNOFFDbTh1oZYbsk-SCdsXwi6c9t-aDkLWCEWwFGgLW0y2vFG2LDXzcgRWitV3i98e0gcCGkWT7F~K5PmSi60TlBfgkk~T8oLf0LIjQ~ycF850dZNsGsVdMfmr4tmICYU64BzORAhXYf0gZQLG-zUjLDDdHImHcLP5NPKwHYadZHWXg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)
    
    [View Original](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/tank-ch002-image008.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=vit4n~L6rsa4d~Ifb50ZWfsf1GgnPKp6CGtHi4mjAQSXV3VhjLOe0bUAFyuHNBg~LXRFx8O1yONOgJpufPXfDDmBHGQrVJ7eChC9Kr3mgQMwlfB~4EwHjfPGVFG6U6OjeqfSOdUxrNUzHrQB4ryhkTOQKkllbCRIsClgjV3OWEjxAkrs0WyO5BKtNMDOTbnvQ1AEHEac1nTmQ~B5ZHNYOAMaa1tN9UZoHhCHhD8ZfSUI1OVNJkmI~vMPry7k-~8wSXcI47vpePkpJ0RSsCtVQGwqtj4nM4Glg~V7vtOZU07PnALnz7E0gHhLrZVcrVhXVkUVXYVifHfmhM21DheUFg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)[Download Slide (.ppt)](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/downloadimage.aspx?sec=50974685&image=https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/tank-ch002-image008.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=vit4n~L6rsa4d~Ifb50ZWfsf1GgnPKp6CGtHi4mjAQSXV3VhjLOe0bUAFyuHNBg~LXRFx8O1yONOgJpufPXfDDmBHGQrVJ7eChC9Kr3mgQMwlfB~4EwHjfPGVFG6U6OjeqfSOdUxrNUzHrQB4ryhkTOQKkllbCRIsClgjV3OWEjxAkrs0WyO5BKtNMDOTbnvQ1AEHEac1nTmQ~B5ZHNYOAMaa1tN9UZoHhCHhD8ZfSUI1OVNJkmI~vMPry7k-~8wSXcI47vpePkpJ0RSsCtVQGwqtj4nM4Glg~V7vtOZU07PnALnz7E0gHhLrZVcrVhXVkUVXYVifHfmhM21DheUFg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA&ChapterSecID=49069877&BookID=761)
    
    **Cuts for reflection of the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles.**
    
14. Read a description of the **clavipectoral fascia** and understand that it is immediately deep to the pectoralis major muscle. Superiorly, the clavipectoral fascia is attached to the clavicle. It lies both superficial and deep to the subclavius muscle and the pectoralis minor muscle. Inferiorly, the clavipectoral fascia is attached to the axillary fascia.
15. Note that the cephalic vein passes through the **costocoracoid membrane** (part of the clavipectoral fascia) on the medial side of the pectoralis minor muscle. The **thoracoacromial artery** and the **lateral pectoral nerve** also pass through the costocoracoid membrane.
16. Use scissors to detach the pectoralis minor muscle from its inferior attachments on ribs 3 to 5 (FIG. 2.8, dashed line).
17. Reflect the pectoralis minor muscle superiorly. Leave the muscle attached to the coracoid process of the scapula. **[G 508; L 42; N 415; R 412; C 22]**
18. Clean the branches of the thoracoacromial artery. Begin by finding the pectoral branch and trace it proximally to find the other branches. Identify the following (FIG. 2.9):
    - **Pectoral branch –** descends between the pectoralis major muscle and the pectoralis minor muscle and supplies both. It is usually the largest branch of the thoracoacromial artery.
    - **Deltoid branch –** courses laterally in the deltopectoral groove between the deltoid muscle and pectoralis major muscle. The deltoid branch accompanies the cephalic vein.
    - **Acromial branch –** passes superior to the coracoid process and courses toward the acromion. It may arise from the deltoid branch several centimeters from the thoracoacromial artery.
    - **Clavicular branch –** courses superiorly and medially to supply the subclavius muscle and the sternoclavicular joint.
        
        **FIGURE 2.9.**
        
        ![https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/m_tank-ch002-image009.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=zu3Rv8Cxaim~wtjwjSEkROaH8qKqvoqBG1GwFJovlGUTiBxmhOROWTOaeQrSCirqzgnNlRsnUo-1hYTGp~TMRUsl2pE3Ue7VFU1o5a7fMRLHWpZNKgqIoSsgVIKHqS0KwglREwgDxkV8pfUuHYwek4~bhdeb90igmmlQeIW4hAKq36XMRPJ-IrMMNuKGzqQHpKT8Rn1tlV1lP2TkbHwA2UWpI2PgdRh9-LQuYJrzb5GWYACBtoy3ZmkuTv8L6cXClUk~wFwncjkCTJ0iEm5J8lLE5zGU9wgn0F3NHTpiM9CznJpw361oj0DfQ6x7skRcKAaoH4yIfPamzjogyNVkRg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/m_tank-ch002-image009.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=zu3Rv8Cxaim~wtjwjSEkROaH8qKqvoqBG1GwFJovlGUTiBxmhOROWTOaeQrSCirqzgnNlRsnUo-1hYTGp~TMRUsl2pE3Ue7VFU1o5a7fMRLHWpZNKgqIoSsgVIKHqS0KwglREwgDxkV8pfUuHYwek4~bhdeb90igmmlQeIW4hAKq36XMRPJ-IrMMNuKGzqQHpKT8Rn1tlV1lP2TkbHwA2UWpI2PgdRh9-LQuYJrzb5GWYACBtoy3ZmkuTv8L6cXClUk~wFwncjkCTJ0iEm5J8lLE5zGU9wgn0F3NHTpiM9CznJpw361oj0DfQ6x7skRcKAaoH4yIfPamzjogyNVkRg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)
        
        [View Original](https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/tank-ch002-image009.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=voLGG8B3yiqouBtkjGIyFdIJvwgJCzGRjhFADBWgEqjaU7Yiw4~LARuD0K3cvWEUa8Mkrmga2IWwYyAnvn6VDEK7VKxHK8de7VHO2VEGLFk6-Ky1IJms9~Xh49n4bkC9ZVr7YMPZaqMtm49mMcdpswECvEtyeSPdzNAQrXsQu8UtiBDhvy03hdlFniBvLV99a~pVJhUdr7-9gUeXJBu1JYiuSuhR8AzijkZ0rA4OasRln-lxeFgDeTLQCKnn08m6o0zzj1FPrWH-KTRSRPabejfF4P9j4RSiYWU1SuSmXZXee2Iox-~b0XujmRAMXdcbT1VywgNf~lxhsoXQCdJLGA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)[Download Slide (.ppt)](https://meded-lwwhealthlibrary-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/downloadimage.aspx?sec=50974685&image=https://hl.silverchair-cdn.com/wk/hl/content_public/book/761/tank-ch002-image009.jpeg?Expires=1644476622&Signature=voLGG8B3yiqouBtkjGIyFdIJvwgJCzGRjhFADBWgEqjaU7Yiw4~LARuD0K3cvWEUa8Mkrmga2IWwYyAnvn6VDEK7VKxHK8de7VHO2VEGLFk6-Ky1IJms9~Xh49n4bkC9ZVr7YMPZaqMtm49mMcdpswECvEtyeSPdzNAQrXsQu8UtiBDhvy03hdlFniBvLV99a~pVJhUdr7-9gUeXJBu1JYiuSuhR8AzijkZ0rA4OasRln-lxeFgDeTLQCKnn08m6o0zzj1FPrWH-KTRSRPabejfF4P9j4RSiYWU1SuSmXZXee2Iox-~b0XujmRAMXdcbT1VywgNf~lxhsoXQCdJLGA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA&ChapterSecID=49069877&BookID=761)
        
        **Blood supply to the pectoral region.**
        
19. Along the lateral border of the pectoralis minor muscle, identify the **lateral thoracic artery** (FIG. 2.9). Do not follow the lateral thoracic artery at this time.
20. Identify the **serratus anterior muscle** (FIG. 2.8). It covers the lateral surface of the thoracic wall. Note its extensive anterior attachments on the upper eighth or ninth ribs. The posterior attachment of the serratus anterior muscle is on the anterior surface of the scapula along the entire length of its medial border. You cannot see the posterior attachment at this time.

****Dissection Follow-up****

1.  Replace the pectoral muscles into their correct anatomical positions.
2.  Review the attachments of the pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, and subclavius muscles. Review their actions, innervations, and blood supply.
3.  Review the relationship of the clavipectoral fascia to the muscles, vessels, and nerves of this region.
4.  Be sure that you understand the role played by the clavipectoral fascia to support the base of the axilla.
5.  Name all branches of the thoracoacromial artery and the structures supplied by each branch.